Strategies to improve query performance: operations, number and size … (#5215)
influxdata/docs-v2: content/influxdb/cloud-dedicated/query-data/troubleshoot-and-optimize/analyze-query-plan.md

                   ┌─────────────────────────┐
                   │        UnionExec        │
                   └─────────────────────────┘
                                ▲
             ┌──────────────────┴─────────────────┐
             │                                    │
┌─────────────────────────┐          ┌─────────────────────────┐
│        SortExec         │          │        SortExec         │
└─────────────────────────┘          └─────────────────────────┘
             ▲                                    ▲
             │                                    │
             │                                    │
┌─────────────────────────┐          ┌─────────────────────────┐
│       ParquetExec       │          │       ParquetExec       │
└─────────────────────────┘          └─────────────────────────┘
```

{{% caption %}}
Execution and data flow in the [`EXPLAIN` report](explain-report) physical plan.
`ParquetExec` nodes execute in parallel and `UnionExec` combines their output.
{{% /caption %}}

The following steps summarize the [physical plan execution and data flow](#physical-plan-data-flow):

1. Two `ParquetExec` plans, in parallel, read data from Parquet files.

>     Each `ParquetExec` node reads data sequentially from each file in its file group, and then outputs a stream of data to its corresponding `SortExec` node.

Reviewer: If you want to make it clearer, each `ParquetExec` can include one or many groups, each group can have one or many files. Different groups will read in parallel but files in each group will be read sequentially

2. The `SortExec` nodes, in parallel, sort the data by `city` (ascending) and `time` (descending).
3. The `UnionExec` node unions the output of the parallel `SortExec` nodes.

> 4. The `SortPreservingMergeExec` node sorts and merges the `UnionExec` output.

Reviewer: `SortPreservingMergeExec` only does the merge. Its input data must be already sorted and we ensure the input streams are sorted (by adding the `Sort` as needed)

> 4. The `SortPreservingMergeExec` node sorts and merges the `UnionExec` output.

Author: ```suggestion
4. The `SortPreservingMergeExec` node merges the sorted data and unioned data from the `UnionExec` output.
```

### Analyze branch structures

After data is output from a data scanning node, it flows up to the next parent (outer) node.

In the example plan:

- Each leaf node is the first step in a branch of nodes planned for processing the scanned data.
- The three branches execute in parallel.
- After the leaf node, each branch contains the following similar node structure:

```sql
...
CoalesceBatchesExec: target_batch_size=8192
    FilterExec: time@3 >= 200 AND time@3 < 700 AND state@2 = MA
    ...
```

- `FilterExec: time@3 >= 200 AND time@3 < 700 AND state@2 = MA`: filters data for the condition `time@3 >= 200 AND time@3 < 700 AND state@2 = MA`, and guarantees that all data is pruned.
- `CoalesceBatchesExec: target_batch_size=8192`: combines small batches into larger batches. See the DataFusion [`CoalesceBatchesExec`] documentation.

#### Sorting yet-to-be-persisted data

In the `RecordBatchesExec` branch, the node that follows `CoalesceBatchesExec` is a `SortExec` node:

```sql
SortExec: expr=[state@2 ASC,city@1 ASC,time@3 ASC,__chunk_order@0 ASC]
```

The node uses the specified expression `state ASC, city ASC, time ASC, __chunk_order ASC` to sort the yet-to-be-persisted data.

> Neither ParquetExec_A nor ParquetExec_B contain a similar node because data in the Object store is already sorted (by the Compactor) in the given order; the query plan only needs to sort data that arrives from the Ingester.

Reviewer: "(by the Compactor)"

Ingesters also persist files so actually a file is either sorted by an ingester or a compactor

> Neither ParquetExec_A nor ParquetExec_B contain a similar node because data in the Object store is already sorted (by the Compactor) in the given order; the query plan only needs to sort data that arrives from the Ingester.

Author: ```suggestion
Neither ParquetExec_A nor ParquetExec_B contain a `SortExec` node because data in the Object store is already sorted in the given order; the query plan only needs to sort data that arrives from the Ingester.
```

#### Recognize overlapping and duplicate data

In the example physical plan, the ParquetExec_B and `RecordBatchesExec` nodes share the following parent nodes:

```sql
...
DeduplicateExec: [state@2 ASC,city@1 ASC,time@3 ASC]
    SortPreservingMergeExec: [state@2 ASC,city@1 ASC,time@3 ASC,__chunk_order@0 ASC]
        UnionExec
            ...
```

{{% caption %}}Overlapped data node structure{{% /caption %}}

> 1. `UnionExec`: unions separate streams without merging them.

Reviewer: I am not sure I understand `separate` in this context.

I know my original description may confuse this `UnionExec is simply a place to pull many streams together. It is fast to execute and does not merge anything.` but I don't think `separate` is the right word here

> 1. `UnionExec`: unions separate streams without merging them.

Author: ```suggestion
1. `UnionExec`: unions multiple streams without merging them.
```
